Assignment 1
IMAGES:All images may be found in the TEST IMAGES folder:
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/7aw3coygs3r8naw/AACUIg6mQyI1__815I5zOOlYa?dl=0
Submission Protocol:
• Submit all code inPython.
• Each problem must be in a separateJupyter notebook(.ipynb).
• Organize all files in a single folder, with subfolders named by problem number.
•Google Colabis allowed.
•Do not include data files—submission size should be only a few KB.
• Include clearexplanationsin each notebook.
• Attach aPDF reportsummarizing your findings.
1.(2 pts)camera noisy.jpgis a noisy version of the imagecameraman. Using an image pyramid
with Gaussian filtering, create a multiresolution decomposition of the noisy image (with at least two
levels). Denoise the image by reconstructing it from the multi-resolution decomposition, de-emphasizing
high-frequency components using a Laplacian filter.
Please ensure that:
• You implement all filters from scratch.
• You clearly explain your choice of filter parameters.
• You describe how you reduced the impact of high-frequency components.
Name your solution file asProblem1.ipynb.
2.(2 pts) Feature Matching:Complete theProblem2.ipynbnotebook provided in the folder. The goal
of this problem is to match features between two different images based on detected keypoints. We will
use a pre-trained VGG-16 model to extract intermediate feature maps, which will be used for keypoint
matching.
The notebook includes several stages such as image preprocessing, feature descriptor computation, and
matching using distance-based criteria. The entire code has already been implemented for you. You need
to do the following and summarize your observations:
(a) Choose two different intermediate layers and report the keypoint matches from each.
(b) Choose two different matching ratios and report the keypoint matches from each.
3.(3 pts)In this problem, you will reconstruct the images using principal component analysis (PCA). Vec-
torize each image in thepca face imagesdataset (https://www.dropbox.com/s/0g15mi9czdbcqfy/
pca_face_images.zip?dl=0). Compute the mean image and subtract it from each vectorized im-
age to obtain zero mean vectorsX∈R d×N, whereNis the number of images. Compute the covariance
matrixR=XX T .
1
(a) Perform PCA by decomposingRasR=UΣU T .
(b) Analyze the eigenvalues inΣand determine which ones to retain. Consider plotting the eigenvalues
to help set a threshold.
(c) Reconstruct approximations for eachXafter discarding small eigenvalues. Display some example
reconstructions.
(d) Calculate and report the reconstruction error between the original and reconstructed images (re-
member to add the mean).
(e) Experiment with different numbers of retained eigenvalues and analyze the impact.
(f) Cluster the dataset using the PCA coefficients. Evaluate whether images of the same individual
tend to cluster together.
Name your solution file asProblem3.ipynb.
4.(2 pts)On thepeppers color.tifimage, implement the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algo-
rithm for a Gaussian Mixture Model based on color features to segment the image. Visually analyze the
segmentation results and discuss their quality. Explicitly implement core EM steps—do not use built-in
EM/GMM libraries.
Name your solution file asProblem4.ipynb.
5.(1 pts)Implement the Fourier Style Transfer approach described in the following paper:
https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2020/papers/Yang_FDA_Fourier_
Domain_Adaptation_for_Semantic_Segmentation_CVPR_2020_paper.pdf
Your implementation should accept a source and a target image and output a version of the source image
stylized according to the target. You may usein-builtlibraries for FFT operations. The required images
are available in the assignment folder.
Name your solution file asProblem5.ipynb.
2