  
A Controlled & Comparative Study of effectiveness of Reactive and Planning Strategies of LLM Agents in navigation tasks
EE228 - Final Project
Team - Neural Ops

Changxin Wan, Calvin Glisson, Kedar Nitin Shiralkar, Bhargav Srikanta Prasad Hoskote, Vedant Deepak Borkute

LLMs have recently been developed as autonomous agents capable of interacting with environments, using tools, and solving multi-step tasks. 

Agentic AI has gained significant traction in both academia and industry. A variety of frameworks exist for agents, such as Chain-of-Thought, ReAct, etc.
Each of these approaches have their pros and cons, and we aim to investigate which one proves better suited for navigation tasks, particularly in the OpenAI Gym Minigrid environment.
Motivation of the Project
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.02039
2

Problem Statement
We evaluate which advanced reasoning/planning xstrategies improves agent performance the best in grid environments.
We compare five inference strategies via an ablation study:
Reactive (baseline)
ReAct
Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
Tree-of-Thought (ToT)
Buffer-of-Thought (BoT)
Across three difficulty levels of tasks
Model Used: Qwen 2.5 Instruct 7B Model
Key questions:
Which strategy performs best overall?
What is the compute/token tradeoff?
3

Overall Framework of the Project
Chain-of-Thought
-Generated by Gemini 3-pro
4
Three modules:
Modeling of the five LLM agents
Prompts Engineering for LLM input and response
Performance metric design for comparison

2D grid world with different objects
Lava, Wall, Empty, Key, Door
Control Task
Goal reaching
Pick up a object
Find the key to unlock door
Right door open, Etc.
State
Position
Nearby box states
Goal position
Actions
Move_forward, turn_left, turn_right
Pickup, drop, toggle
Done
Environment Description
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.13831
Env list
Mission list
5

Empty8x8
LavagapS6
LavaCrossingS9N2
Selected Environments
Difficulty increased
Env:
No lava
Aim:
Navigate to the goal
Env:
Single Lava stream
Aim:
Navigate to the goal
Env:
Multiple Lava streams
Aim:
Navigate to the goal
Text observation
Current Position and Direction:
  — Agent at [3,1] facing up. 
Nearby box status: 
  — Front: wall, 
  — Left: empty,
  — Right: lava,
  — Behind: empty. 
  — The cell directly in front of you contains wall. 
Goal status:
  — Goal at [7,7]. Distance: 10 steps. 
  — You need to go: right, down. 
  — You are NOT facing the goal — consider turning. 
Lava Position: 
  — [1,4], [3,4], [4,1], [4,2], [4,3], [4,4], [4,5], 
    [4,6], [5,4], [6,4], [7,4]. 
Action space
action = {Turn_left, Turn_right, Move_forward}
6

Empty8x8
LavagapS6
LavaCrossingS9N2
Setting:
No lava
Aim:
Navigate to the goal
Setting:
Single Lava stream
Aim:
Navigate to the goal
Env:
Multiple Lava streams
Aim:
Navigate to the goal

Baseline (no special prompting)
ReAct
Chain-of-Thought
Tree-of-Thought
Buffer-of-Thought
Model used: Q-wen 2.5-7B-Instruct
Max tokens per interaction: 5000
Num of experiments per environment: 20 (seeds from 0 to 20)
Five Methods and Parameter Used
8

Baseline (Reactive)
Input
Output
Let the model to output action directly for given text observation.
System prompt
You are a Reactive AI agent in a 2D grid world. You respond ONLY with the exact name of the action to take. You cannot do anything else except taking action. 
User prompt (Interaction)
Goal: reach the goal tile while avoiding lava.
Important rule: Never move_forward if the front cell contains lava.
Current Status:
       {text_observation}
You should just take one action
Allowed actions: {turn_left, turn_right, move_forward}
Do not output multiple actions.
Action output with LLM response
text = response.choices[0].message.content.strip()
action = text if text in {turn_left, turn_right, move_forward} else move_forward
LLMs
9

ReAct
ReAct = Reason + Act (Yao, Shunyu, et al. "React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models." The eleventh international conference on learning representations. 2022.)
Encourages the model to reason before acting. 
The prompt includes 
Goal
Environment rules (i.e. cannot walk through walls, lava is deadly).
Environment description (i.e. location, nearby hazards/goals). 
Previous History of actions and reasoning
Allowed actions.
It reasons based on the current state description and previous actions and outputs a thought and action.

You are navigating a 2D grid world.
    Goal: reach the goal tile while avoiding lava by reasoning before taking the action
    Important rule:
    Never move_forward if the front cell contains lava.
    Observation:
    {obs}
    Previous Reasoning:
    {hist}
    Respond with EXACTLY ONE step in this format:
    Thought: reasoning
    Action: one action
    Allowed actions:
    turn_left
    turn_right
    move_forward
    Do not output multiple actions.
10

Encourages the model to think step-by-step before coming up with an action.
The prompt includes 
Environment rules (i.e. cannot walk through walls, lava is deadly).
Environment description (i.e. location, nearby hazards/goals). 
Recent actions
CoT checks which actions among current set are valid and safe and selects the single action to execute.

Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
Fig: Illustration of Chain-of-Thought Image Source: orq.ai blog
11
"thinking out loud." Instead of jumping from an input directly to an action, we force the model to generate a linear sequence of intermediate steps.
In an agentic setting, the prompt is grounded in reality. It includes the environment rules to be follows, a description of current surroundings, and recent action history.
This step-by-step approach allows the model to self-correct and verify if an action is safe or valid before execution. 


Instead of one reasoning chain, the model explores multiple reasoning paths (e.g., turn left, turn right, move forward) and treats them as branches in a reasoning tree."Let's consider several possible next steps, evaluate each one, and pick the best…"

For each branch, the agent briefly reasons about the resulting state (e.g., distance to the goal, nearby lava or walls) to estimate whether that path is promising.

Branches that lead to unsafe states (e.g., lava, walls, increasing distance from the goal) are discarded, while promising ones are kept.

After comparing the candidate branches, the agent executes the best scored action in the environment.

Tree-of-Thought (ToT)
Fig: Illustration of Tree-of-Thought (ToT)Image source: Yao et al. (2023)
12
The Evolution: While CoT is a single path, Tree-of-Thought introduces exploration. Think of it as a limited BFS/DFS for reasoning.
multiple candidate branches—like turning left, right, or moving forward. 


Buffer-of-Thought (BoT)
A retrieval and exploration based approach: Maintain a dynamic “meta‑buffer” of thought templates for reuse across tasks.
For each new step, we distill features from the current state and find the most relevant template and the agent adapts it instead of reasoning from scratch.

After a failed episode, the agent identifies a failure signature and uses the LLM to generate a new strategy template to be stored in the Meta-Buffer.

Fig: Difference between single query (CoT, ReAct, baseline), multi query (ToT) and BoT reasoning approaches.Image Source: Yang et. al. (2024)
13
The "Meta-Buffer": BoT uses a retrieval-based approach. It maintains a library of "thought templates" for various task structures. Instead of raw reasoning, the Problem Distiller identifies the task type and retrieves a relevant template from the Meta-Buffer.
This allows the agent to reusing proven reasoning patterns rather than reinventing the wheel every time.

Results: Empty8x8
14

Results: LavaGapS6
15

Results: LavaCrossingS9N2
16

Detailed Analysis
17

Success rates generally better with reasoning methods vs baseline
However, more elaborate methods cost more tokens
BoT and ToT achieve the best performance, but with caveats
ToT uses many more tokens since it relies on exploring multiple paths at each decision.
BoT initially either relies on quality seed templates or needs more exploration to generate effective templates.
CoT achieves nearly as good performance without increasing steps or tokens as much.
Ultimately, the best choice would depend on the bottlenecks of the situation such as token budget, latency and data availability.
In the future, different agentic strategies, or a combination of current ones can be explored along with bigger and more capable models. Methods like quantization can be used to manage latency for bigger models.
Conclusion and Future Directions
18

Group member
Contribution
Changxin Wan
Basic testing framework, Reactive LLM agent
Calvin Glisson
Expanded testing framework, CoT agent
Kedar Nitin Shiralkar
Environment Wrapper Base, ReAct Agent Code
Bhargav Srikanta Prasad Hoskote
Environment Wrapper advancement,ToT agent 
Vedant Deepak Borkute
Structured output framework, BoT agent
Contributions
19
